in a lot of ways YouTube conditions the
audience to expect people to make
extreme and provocative statements that
they can't really back up with any kind
of substance or depth of real-life
experience research information etc etc
to some extent people reacted to my
critique of earthling IDI and it what's
been going on lately in terms of vegan
street activism and the phenomenon that
I like to call celebrity culture
devouring real activism or real politics
whatever politics is supposed to be you
think about the president future
veganism um a lot of people reacted to
that as if I was just making a kind of
outrageous one-liner as if I were really
someone like a stand-up comedian tossing
an insult in Earthling heads direction
and that had nothing to back it up with
and anyone who talked to me whatever
medium back-and-forth one of the first
things I had to say was no no I've
really been engaged in this type of
critique it great depth and with good
intentions and real sincerity for years
including the earlier video I did in
real death discussing the political
philosophy of Earthling ad and that
earlier video is a critique but in some
ways very fundamentally it's flattering
to Earthling ad and i think it drew
people's attention to the fact that
earthling ed has a political philosophy
which I think even most of his
supporters are not aware of as it
happens I expressed my opinion that this
political philosophy is wrong but I did
so on that earlier video in a really
appreciative manner that I appreciate
this is someone who's devoting his time
to getting out in the street and trying
to promote veganism as best he can and I
think most people engaged in the
critique of earthling ed do start with
that generally appreciative tone even
though all of us at some point or
another must must hit our limits but
back to the basic principle thing here
one if I were just doing what a stand-up
comedian did and kind of making a
shallow even if it was making a merely
satirical set of remarks worth looking
at I think that still really would be
valuable I think that's something
veganism in general needs and it's
something that the people who are at the
extreme edge of verging into being cult
leaders like earthling at I think it's
on they really need I think it's a
wake-up call they need to have a laugh
at themselves have a step back and be
willing to look at what they're saying
in a lecture like that that I was that I
was just some extent criticized in some
extent yeah ridiculing and say yeah you
know what maybe this is a bit laughable
maybe we have to take on a little bit of
a different direction in tone and guys
if you're watching this video and you've
already hit the thumbs down if you're a
sincere supporter of earthling it
you should really ask yourself why can't
he do that why can't he step back and
and have laughing himself and on this
channel again and again I really do have
a laugh of myself part of the original
description of what this channel does on
patreon it used to be here on YouTube
also it still states self parody as part
of the Mandate of what we do so you know
there's a lot of sincere examination and
inquiry and analysis that goes on on
this channel but I'm delighted
whenever I discover another YouTube
channel that's really criticized me and
you will have seen this again and again
if you've been watching the channel for
a while I often directly re-upload
people's criticisms of me and often I I
don't even answer them like I don't even
disagree with them in the video so the
three most recent examples I can think
of offhand a lot of you will remember
this video is really quite funny
a guy named Rob an Australian guy with a
thick Australian accent made a really
vitriolic angry video criticizing me and
I just took his video I edited it I mean
it's slightly more concise because at
one point he just started talking about
his own work history he started talking
bout his own life he kind of had a
digression so I edited that part up but
I
wasn't censoring it to flatter myself it
was all the hardest-hitting criticism
that he directed towards me and I
reapplied it to my own channel and you
know for the most part in that case
people just had a laugh at it
another guy who's a bit more of a
new-age diet guru criticized me again
very harshly and in that case I re
uploaded his entire criticism to my
channel the entire criticism he directed
me and I didn't verbally respond to or
about anything he said but he did it is
crispy to me it was hilarious he
insulted the physical condition I'm in
so put in a brief clip of me doing
push-ups and uh some pictures of me with
my shirt off flexing my muscles just
like that and then otherwise you know I
just let his criticism you know proceed
so this this my pointer it's not just
that I enjoy having laugh at myself I do
engage in self parody and self-mockery
I'm actively seeking out and engaging in
meaningful critique meaningful criticism
when it's directed my way I don't just
offer it towards others and never in my
life on youtube or in academia or in you
know writing formal articles or
presenting papers at conferences and
whether that was a you know more
academic setting or more of a real world
conference paper setting like you're
presenting a paper to donors from the
European Union and other government and
semi government officials about what's
going on in humanitarian work in
Cambodia have been in non-academic
situations that I've presented a paper
to a bunch of people who are like
architects working on a project you know
more of a corporate setting I've never
in my life once had someone offer a
sincere and in-depth criticism of my
work in the way that I offered in that
earlier video a critique of the
political philosophy of Earthling ad so
there are two questions there that you
can get you can ask about earthling yet
you know one is why can't he step back
and take a bit of a laugh at himself if
someone were
on to what he did satirically and a lot
of there was a lot of support for my
more recent video which opened with a
little satirical montage then had some
meaningful reflections I mean the whole
video wasn't mockery but any search the
imagination but there's another question
there why did he never respond to that
earlier longer in-depth critique really
talking about his political philosophy
that was offered to use to use my
mother's phrase my mother likes to use
this phrase from the 1960s you know that
was an argument in good faith I was
engaging with his philosophy in his
perspective what he's doing is a leader
in the in the vegan movement I was
really doing that in good faith and you
know you tell me why couldn't he also
respond in good faith at the time I made
that video he was not yet a celebrity
within veganism he was not yet rich and
he was not yet famous and of those three
statements rich famous and celebrity the
two that are debatable are famous and
celebrity you know is he really famous
he's Mike Rowe famous is he really a
celebrity within a certain subculture
he's a celebrity but rich is not
debatable I mean we really know that he
has become wealthy by performing this
peculiar script again and again having
what are frankly counterproductive
hostile conversations with strangers in
the street you know you can go to his
YouTube channel you can see again
obviously he has the best of intentions
but this is you know it's acting out the
same familiar script again and again for
an an appreciative audience but the real
function being played by this
interaction for earthling at himself for
the audience in terms of effective
activism you know it's worth questioning
and ensure on this channel we're gonna
question it maybe sometimes the little
bit of satire maybe sometimes in a more
sincere and sober way as I did that
earlier video I'm pretty sure it has
critique in the title um
look let's talk a little bit about
YouTube and frames this whole thing
briefly um I said before YouTube seems
to train the audience to have this
expectation that people are just gonna
make candy and extreme remarks for
talkative remarks then have nothing to
back it up with and I saw that happen in
the comments section uh following after
my recent video in which you know I was
talking about communism of a sermo
communism negatively and if you check my
Instagram by the way I have a hilarious
picture of myself attending an
anti-communist pro-democracy
demonstration just a couple of days ago
I didn't I didn't even know what's
happening it was complete luck I showed
up in the right place the right time and
I got to participate in that in that
demonstration it's way quite moving and
quite meaningful to meet and talk to
those people um more people should care
about democracy more people should care
about the terrible history communism has
had and the terrible threat it is you
know for the future of you know the
whole world frankly but of course
especially Asia Southeast Asia East Asia
etc anyway communism is still out there
and those are debates still having I
made this video a couple days ago
talking about communism of course there
were positive comments a lot of people
appreciate in support of that video but
in the negative comments
the majority sentiment the majority
conviction the majority assumption of
the people writing in negatively they
either opened or ended the comment by
saying that I don't know what I'm
talking about that I'm just making these
remarks about communism without having
done any reading or research now I don't
know what kind of people you know you
guys mix with but it's really likely
that you will never in your life meet
someone who knows more about communism
that I do the number of years I've put
into studying the history of communism
all over the world both both the subject
matter being all over the world and my
actually living in communist countries
you know at this point I mean I have
expertise in Buddhist studies it's very
likely you'll never meet someone who's
more of an expert in Buddhism if you do
I'm happy for you that's great there are
there are dedicated scholars but there
were not a lot of them and you know if
you just google my name a + communism I
think you're gonna find some of the
essays I've written various reflections
the life eyelid lived and and how much
depth
I really have on this topic so there's a
strange kind of parallel here where you
know you dare to criticize earthling
edge you dare to criticize what's going
on in the vegan movement the instinctual
reaction is and it's just created by
this frame right here
it's just created by the format of the
YouTube video the instinctual reaction
is you don't know what you're talking
about
because you're on YouTube because you're
a glittering image in YouTube without
even searching within this YouTube
channel to see how many videos have made
talking about communism without
searching within this YouTube channel to
see how many videos have made talking
about earthling ed or talking about
what's going on in in vegan activism so
on and so forth ok at this point you're
gonna see I'm coming back to my main
topic momentarily but this this little
digression could almost be a separate
video in itself is veganism growing or
is it shrinking in a very real sense the
true answer is both there is a new
Gallup poll out 2018 Gallup poll Gallup
is a research company they're famous for
doing social science research and
surveys they did a very sloppy very
cheap telephone survey they interviewed
approximately 1,000 people through
dialing random numbers it's not a big
survey and in the year 2018 you tell me
what type of person even answers the
phone when they get a call from an
unknown number and when that unknown
number explains that they're conducting
a survey what kind of person just hangs
up the phone and what kind of person
continues the call so
in many ways a deeply biased deeply
flawed survey I remember I wrote I've
written about these problems before in
the past in political science in
research of various kinds but with that
deeply flawed and cheap methodology
ultimately this is cheap low-quality
research back in the year 2012 they
discovered using this methodology that
perhaps 2% of Americans or vegan okay
now again this is 2% of the type of
person who will answer a random number
that never seen before on the phone and
when they're told this is a polled you
have a minute to answer a few questions
will stay on the line 2% of those people
and who speak English fluently said they
were vegan and then when they did the
poll again in 2018 they instead found 3%
of people were vegan in the United
States of America ok so that would
indicate modest growth there's also a
sense in which we all know veganism is
shrinking veganism is losing its
tenacity it's losing its Verve it's
losing its edge and this is obvious most
of all for those of us who were right
here inside this glowing box YouTube I
remember discussing this with Charles
Marlow years and years ago back before
his content turned to garbage back when
he was a friend of mine and a colleague
in the movement before he did drama
videos at all before he did all the
terrible things that have now landed him
in cord and you know he's become a
laughingstock but I remember talking to
Charles and saying to him very bluntly
he was asking me about the potential for
this kind of vegan demi-monde to grow
and grow to have bigger and bigger
audiences and I said to him look
lightning doesn't strike twice something
really special happened something really
unique in the history of the Western
world happened when for the first time
people came on YouTube and they saw
slaughterhouse footage and they were
shocked and appalled and got motivated
and googled it and found out all this
information and each person has a
different story right but whether you
think of that as saying that happened in
2012 or 2011 maybe for you personally to
happen in 2008 by about 2016 that brief
glow of excitement the the shock and
horror and excitement that was caused by
people watching Earthlings for the first
time Earthlings is a documentary film
with a lot of slaughterhouse footage
from farm to fridge it's another one
here on YouTube whatever the particular
YouTube video may be that you're
thinking of maybe one that's unnamed
neither famous nor but some vegan
informational video or slaughterhouse
footage video this got played out it
wasn't new anymore right something
parallel has happened in cuisine right
there was a time when just the idea of
vegan bacon bacon that was vegan was
shocking and original and edgy and cool
have you said to a meat-eater or even if
you said to a feature vegan or
vegetarian hey guess what there's this
new product vegan bacon oh can you
believe it do you want to try it whether
you think that was 2008 or 2002 or 2011
I don't care this is now 2018 it's not
edgy it's not shocking it's not cool
it's not new vegan bacon has become part
of the drumbeat of daily life nobody
cares anymore
I mean I'm old enough I can remember
when if someone said vegan yogurt to me
I thought they were making a joke like
the concept of yogurt with no count but
what really and vegan yogurt became part
of my daily life it became part of a lot
of people's daily lives right what we've
been doing here on this glowing
rectangle on this screen it went through
a peak of public interest it was partly
caused by that shock
partly caused by mainstream media
sitting down and taking notice of
veganism for the first time there was
the first time veganism was discussed on
Oprah so Oprah named The Oprah Winfrey
is the name of the woman who makes the
TV show it's a famous TV show in the
United States of America if you're
watching this in Japan or Germany you
might not know what I'm talking about
Oprah Winfrey covered veganism in a huge
way for the first time it was shocking
it was new it was interesting to people
okay that doesn't happen twice if today
Oprah Winfrey talks about veganism it
doesn't have that impact okay
Bill Clinton became vegan and a lot of
people talked about it today Al Gore is
also vegan and was celebrity to me the
first time you heard about a celebrity
beaming the first time a mainstream news
network had a vegan person on and did an
interview yes there was shock it was
something new it was something edgy and
then guess what guys the edge doesn't
last long at all it becomes boring it
becomes hackneyed it becomes the butt of
every joke in at some point it's even
going to become you know a blood so the
subject of nostalgia right Oh remember
when veganism was exciting and novel and
cool right
that's not gonna last Hey so on the
internet fads live and die fast and hard
in real life on the street there's no
doubt there's a much slower process
going on where I mean the first people
to really do it and this is partly
because the technology of the laptop
computer became cheaper then later
people were doing it with tablet
computers there was a girl named Phoebe
and her sister in London England and
they felt fed up with vegan activism
and they decided to do their own thing
these two young women I think they were
Tina I think they were about 18 years
old at the time I don't know there's
that but they were they were pretty
young women and they decided to put on
this plain white mask not a Guy Fawkes
mask a plain white mask and to sit with
their laptop computer on their lap
riding the subway in London England if
you've never been to London England it's
quite a crowded subway there's not a lot
of space you know they nicknamed it the
tube you feel like you're stuffed into a
tube so people are really crowded
together and I honestly don't know if
they just did this when they were going
from home to school like if they were
taking a trip anyway on the subway or if
they right from the beginning just rode
the subway as far as they could on one
ticket you got all the money's worth out
of there - I don't know what their plan
was initially but they discovered this
was a really interesting and engaging
form of activism where they were playing
these vegan documentaries I believe with
the sound off on their screen and
holding up a sign explaining what they
were doing and I remember the very that
was new at that time and I remember the
very first time I saw anyone imitating
them so that was brand-new at that time
I don't believe they were even on
YouTube and I wasn't either they put
that on their blog I knew them you know
as much as you know someone of the
internet I knew their blog they knew my
blog I was just talking to Phoebe a
couple days ago you know it's nice to
hear from her um she's moved on she's
doing other things but of course she
still invested in vegan activism um I
remember I saw a video of I think an
even younger girl in Toronto and she and
her friends tried to imitate this on the
Toronto subway and the very first time
they did it a guy just freaked out and
started screaming at them and they had
that you know there's really negative
hostile reaction so remember the first
faltering steps in that experiment of
showing slaughterhouse footage taking
the experience on YouTube out of the
living room or out of the office out of
the privacy of your own home with the
computer and wanting to take it out into
the real world and share it with people
and at one point that was something
authentically new and edgy and thrilling
and strange that people tried to do
right and as I say fads don't come and
go in real life as rapidly as they do on
the Internet
but you have to recognize after this has
happened a thousand times ten thousand
times after it's become something you
walk past on your way to work every day
if you live in Sydney Australia and
these protesters with the video screens
and the masks showing slaughterhouse
footage if that's something you have to
see every day when you walk between your
office and your parking spot when you
walk between your office and where you
go to eat your lunch
this becomes part of the drumbeat of
daily life right at least you have to
say the thrill is gone but what's not
gone right now the moment were in in
2018 I think one thing that powerfully
motivates people he's wanting to reach
out to strangers and share the same
thrill and horror the same conversion
experience they themselves felt the
first time they watched slaughterhouse
footage on YouTube whether that was from
farm to fridge or the Earthlings
whatever it was I mean for different
people is different I just mentioned
really briefly one of the only youtubers
I've known in real life face-to-face of
I've met a few in real life she
converted to veganism
because one day she opened a box of
chicken they bought a box of what should
be you know separated chicken breasts
you know little pieces of meat neatly
wrapped up for you and there were
feathers there were feathers inside the
box by accident obviously at the packing
plant or the slaughterhouse or whatever
they have you accidentally left some
feathers in and she felt so horrified
and so disgusted that she dropped the
box she probably cried but she stopped
eating meat immediately and then what
did she do she didn't go to her priest
she didn't go to a Buddhist monk she
didn't go to a library she went to the
internet and started searching for this
information
she searched and she found YouTube
videos she found slaughterhouse videos
she found out about where chicken really
comes from and I think I think she
became vegetarian that day and she ended
up becoming vegan about 6 days later
because of this process of information
right like at first she didn't figure
out all the stuff about dairy and eggs
but like within a week or two weeks she
was totally committed to veganism and
she was struggling with this huge
emotional impact this had on changed the
whole way she view the world she
immediately started trying to convert
her boyfriend to veganism her mom her
grandmother her sister
there was this constellation of people
in her life where she then took this
experience part of which is horror right
and was really trying to impress that
upon other people you know in her orbit
right
and today in 2018 it's gotten old it's
gotten old for the general public it's
gotten old for the viewing the viewing
public you're on YouTube which is a much
smaller group of people but it's gotten
old for us as vegans within anyone else
because we have to hear this and deal
with this all the time
day in day out but there is a nostalgia
that partly drives the street activism
that partly drives people to donate
money to earthling ed there was a
nostalgia for wanting to relive the
drama and dynamism of that period
whether for you that was in 2008 or 2012
or maybe was in 1992 whenever it
happened for you that you made this
connection and of whether it's going on
in the street or in some other
theatrical format trying to take that
YouTube experience slaughterous footage
the moment of realization and then all
the questioning of the facts and
suddenly looking at cultural traditions
and your own culture differently in this
we read this grand re-evaluation of
wanting to go out and share that with
other people and you know what sometimes
it happens
I the friend of mine or a colleague of
mine in the movement I saw she had a
photograph and she wrote up her own
experience recently doing this type of
activism in the street and she got this
gratifying and I think a nostalgic
experience of seeing this family I think
was a family of three people maybe three
or four people and they stood there as a
family and saw this slaughter s footage
and their jaws just dropped and they
suddenly had all these questions and
they wanted this information exactly the
same stuff people Google whenever they
went through the but she got to stand
there with them and she got to basically
say yeah it was like this for me too
maybe 10 years ago I forget how many
years ago she became vegan you know
enough years ago but not not very
recently but whether it was five years
ago or eight years ago or ten years ago
she said yeah you know what the first
time I saw this I had the same questions
you had I wanted to know and I had the
same feeling of injustice and what can I
do and how can we stop this now can we
change and she got to hold their hands
metaphorically speaking not literally as
they went through this and she said the
whole family by the end of it they were
more or less committed like look we
gotta we gotta try to be vegan or
something like vegan we it happens and I
understand the emotional function that
serves okay but nevertheless my
fundamental commitment is to the truth I
didn't get involved in veganism for
emotional reasons I'm not going to
applaud forms of activism or specific
political theories that I know to be
wrong because they make people feel good
I'm not out here chasing a feeling and I
think it's important to recognize that
as much sympathy for that scenario as I
may have that's all it is
it really is chasing a feeling
and as such it's important for someone
like me to engage in analysis and
critique and hold it up to that
comparison we say okay
compared to PCRM compared to other forms
of activism and engagement where we
could be putting the same amount of time
talent and money ultimately about money
financial resources are we really doing
the right thing and most of you already
know my answer is no it's a hard answer
it's an inconvenient answer it's an
emotionally starting a startling answer
for a lot of vegans who are not used to
hearing this from their fellow vegans
but you know what my recent video show
I'm not the only one I'm not the only
one asking those questions I'm not the
only one coming to those conclusions
gonna read you an email I just received
from a patreon supporter please click on
the link below this video support this
channel for one dollar a month I'd love
to hear from you maybe your videos maybe
you'll write to me and your letters also
will inspire a long video like this a
long set of reflections okay so my
supporter who uses the name no meat no
dairy writes as follows quote I was
previously impartial to add I respect
that he has made a huge impact
particularly in England a couple of
friends have said to me that they have
learned so much from him yet well I
think he's pretty good in a debate he's
far from the pot pardon me he's far from
the polished article and he misses
opportunities that being said he puts in
the work and is dedicated so my hat is
off to him I've never felt this need to
hurt me so I'll just foreshadow he's
responding here to my criticism of
earthling heads region recent speech his
speech at the rally that allegedly had
10,000 people attending and in London
England he says I've never before felt
the need to speak negatively of him I
have always thought of him as genuine
but then came this speech I hated it
period
it's not just cult-like because it's
cringe-worthy but because it is a lie
period it is the personification of a
cult leader preaching to his followers
and lying telling them that they are on
the verge of a new dawn telling them
that the world is going to change and
that they are the catalysts that they
are the chosen ones I heard this just as
a return from a holiday in the southwest
of England
I assume you means a beach vacation
there are some beaches there in
southwestern England at the holiday
resort I didn't meet one vegan there
were no vegan options on any of the
menus at any of the restaurants who went
too many people had no idea what
veganism was some did and it was obvious
what they thought of it by the
expressions on their face when veganism
was mentioned back home my daughter is
the only vegan in her school they still
serve milk at all of the receptions for
the kids as standard as part of a quote
unquote healthy diet in my opinion these
rallies where the vegan celebrities give
sermons to their Facebook and Instagram
fans these rallies are doing nothing to
bring about a real change in England why
not spend this time and effort launching
a campaign to challenge the school milk
scheme so meaning challenge the fact
that schools are giving unhealthy
ecologically irresponsible and cruel
products to children such as milk you
know and they're giving disinformation
about the health benefits of milk and a
lot of other things they're certainly
not telling these kids more milk comes
from they're certainly not showing kids
slaughterous footage or footage of how
the tech industry really works they're
explained is it right what so why not
spend this time and effort launching a
campaign to challenge the school milks
milk scheme all the money that goes into
funding the celebrity culture and
rallies could be put into hiring a
lawyer to take the education authorities
to court to hire nutritional scientists
to present the hundreds of studies
showing the negative health effects of
milk consumption and you don't depress
some kind of charges to press some kind
of case against the school boards
because they are misleading
children on how this stuff is produced
on its health benefits he doesn't
mention ecology ecology could be thrown
in there too right there is so much to
be done but instead it's becoming like
war propaganda the leaders are telling
the people at home that they're winning
but the reality on the ground is quite
different moreover I don't believe the
statistic being bounded around that
allegedly 7% of England is now vegan so
I haven't examined that statistic
earlier in this video I scrutinized the
very dubious statistic claiming that
even 3% of people in the United States
of America are vegan indeed there were a
lot of dubious statistics around
proclaiming victory okay where are all
these vegans we can barely get a group
of five together for a local meetup
where I live and it's a big town not far
from London I would be happy to support
real initiatives that seek to educate
children on the effects of animal
agriculture on health and the
environment and that challenge those in
power to justify their support of animal
agriculture and poor dietary advice okay
I've been challenged on my role in the
vegan movement you know many many times
and those challenges all seem to boil
down to people asking how dare you okay
and the answer I have to give ultimately
is just as simple as saying I dare